.. CaPS documentation master file, created by
   sphinx-quickstart on Mon Dec 17 15:08:14 2018.
   You can adapt this file completely to your liking, but it should at least
   contain the root `toctree` directive.

Welcome to the documentation of CaPS!
=====================================

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2


Overview and Features
=====================

.. figure:: images/overview.pdf
   :scale: 100 %

   Experiments in the plane-sphere geometry. The blue area denotes the aspect
   ratios that are accessible using CaPS. The inset depicts the
   plane-sphere geometry.

CaPS is an implementation of the Casimir effect in the plane-sphere geometry.
The geometry consists of a sphere of radius :math:`R` separated by a distance
:math:`L` from an infinite plate as sketched in the inset of Figure 1. We
assume that the sphere and the plane are in vacuum. The main goal of the
library and the associated programs is to compute the free energy
:math:`\mathcal{F}` depending on the radius :math:`R` of the sphere, the
separation :math:`L` between sphere and plate, the temperature :math:`T`, and
the dielectric properties of the sphere and the plane. The code is highly
optimized and allows you -- depending on parameters and your hardware -- to
compute the free energy for aspect ratios up to :math:`R/L\sim 5\,000`.

Features
--------

CaPS provides the following main features:

 - Computation of the free energy for aspect ratios used in typical experiments.
 - Full support for perfect reflectors, metals described by the Drude and plasma model, and generic materials described by a user-defined dielectric function.
 - Support for parallelization using MPI.
 - Computation of the free energy in the high-temperature limit for perfect reflectors and metals described by the Drude or plasma model.

The computation of the high-temperature limit for the Drude model is based on
`Bimonte, Emig, "Exact Results for Classical Casimir Interactions: Dirichlet
and Drude Model in the Sphere-Sphere and Sphere-Plane", Phys. Rev. Lett. 109,
160403 (2012) <https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.109.160403>`_.

Basic support for further geometries is provided for the special case of zero
temperature and perfect reflectors:

 - Computation of the free energy in the plane-cylinder geometry.
 - Computation of the free energy for two spheres with equal radii.

The implementation for the plane-cylinder geometry is based on a symmetrized
version of the matrix elements given in `Emig, Graham, Jaffe, Kardar, "Casimir
Forces between Arbitrary Compact Objects", Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 170403 (2007)
<https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.99.170403>`_.


Further reading
---------------

Some of the numerical ideas used in this library are described in `Hartmann,
Ingold, Maia Neto, "Advancing numerics for the Casimir effect to experimentally
relevant aspect ratios", Phys. Scr. 93, 114003 (2018)
<https://doi.org/10.1088/1402-4896/aae34e>`_. A more detailed description can
be found in `Hartmann, "Casimir effect in the plane-sphere geometry: Beyond the
proximity force approximation", PhD thesis (Universit√§t Augsburg, 2018)
<https://opus.bibliothek.uni-augsburg.de/opus4/44798>`_.


Installation
============

In the following, we assume the operating system to be Ubuntu 18.04. The
commands should also work on other Debian-like systems.

Compilation
-----------

The easiest way to get the source code is to use git. To install git, run

.. code-block:: console

    $ sudo apt install git

in a terminal. Here, the dollar sign indicates the shell prompt. Once git is
installed, the command

.. code-block:: console

    $ git clone https://github.com/michael-hartmann/caps.git

will get you the complete CaPS repository and stores it in the directory
``caps/``. As an alternative, you can also download and extract the zip- or
taz.gz-archive of the latest release.

The CaPS library and the programs are written in C and C++ using LAPACK and
MPI. In order to compile the source code, you need a C and C++ compiler, the
development files for LAPACK and MPI, and the build tools make and cmake. You
can install all dependencies with:

.. code-block:: console

    $ sudo apt install gcc g++ libc6-dev libc++-dev cmake make libopenmpi-dev openmpi-bin liblapack-dev


In order to compile the code, create a directory ``bin`` in the ``caps/``
directory, run ``cmake`` followed by ``make``:

.. code-block:: console

    $ cd caps/
    $ mkdir bin
    $ cd bin/
    $ cmake ..
    $ make

This command compiles the `HODLR library
<https://github.com/sivaramambikasaran/HODLR/>`_, the libcaps library, and
builds the shared objects ``libhodlr.so`` and ``libcaps.so``. Then, the
programs ``caps`` and ``caps_logdetD`` are built. Note that you can also
specify different compilers setting the variables ``CC`` and ``CXX``. Here is
an example how to use the Intel C and C++ compilers:

.. code-block:: console

    $ CC=icc CXX=icpc cmake ..
    $ make

In order to run the programs, the system must be able to find the libraries
``libhodlr.so`` and ``libcaps.so``. As the libraries are not in the default
search path, you have to add the directories to ``LD_LIBRARY_PATH``

.. code-block:: console

    $ export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=$LD_LIBRARY_PATH:/home/hendrik/caps/bin

where we have assumed that the CaPS repository is in the directory
``/home/hendrik``.

You can build the programs ``capc`` (plane-cylinder geometry) and ``cass``
(sphere-sphere geometry with equal radii) to compute the Casimir interaction
for perfect reflectors at :math:`T=0` with:

.. code-block:: console

    $ make
    $ make capc
    $ make cass

On an Ubuntu 18.10 we found problems linking to `OpenBLAS
<https://www.openblas.net/>`_ resulting in error messages similar to:

.. code-block:: console

    undefined reference to 'dgemm_'
    undefined reference to 'dstemr_'
    undefined reference to 'dpotrf_'
    undefined reference to 'dgemm_'
    undefined reference to 'dgetrf_'
    undefined reference to 'dgeqrf_'
    undefined reference to 'ddot_'

In this case, we recommend using `Atlas <http://math-atlas.sourceforge.net/>`_
as a `BLAS <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Basic_Linear_Algebra_Subprograms>`_
implementation. Make sure that you have Atlas installed

.. code-block:: console

    $ sudo apt install libatlas-dev libatlas3-base

and compile the code using:

.. code-block:: console

    $ cd caps/
    $ mkdir bin
    $ cd bin/
    $ cmake .. -DBLA_VENDOR=ATLAS
    $ make


Testing
-------

In order to check whether the compilation was successful, you can build and run
the unit tests in ``bin/``:

.. code-block:: console

    $ make tests
    $ ./caps_tests

All tests should pass. Running the tests takes (depending on your hardware)
about 7 minutes.


Improving performance
---------------------

In order to improve performance, it might be necessary to tweak some compiler
options. By default, the optimization level is ``-O3`` which usually yields
reasonable performance.

If you either run and compile the code on the same machine, or the target
machine supports the same instruction set, the option ``-march=native`` may
increase performance. On an Intel Core i7-2600 machine, this option gives a
performance boost of about 5%. To compile the code with this option, run:

.. code-block:: console

    $ cmake .. -DOPT="-O3 -march=native"


Similarly, link time optimization ``-flto`` might also increase performance.
However, a test on an Intel Core i7-2600 machine showed basically no
performance gain.


Programs
========

caps
----

The program ``caps`` computes the free Casimir energy :math:`\mathcal{F}` for
the plane-sphere geometry as a sum

.. math::
  \mathcal{F} = \frac{k_\mathrm{B}T}{2} \sum_{n=-\infty}^\infty \sum_{m=-\infty}^\infty \log\mathrm{det}\left(1-\mathcal{M}^m(\xi_n)\right)

over the Matsubara frequencies :math:`\xi_n=2\pi n k_\mathrm{B} T /\hbar`. For
zero temperature :math:`T=0`, the sum over the Matsubara frequencies becomes an
integration.

The program supports a wide variety of options. You can get a summary of all
options using ``caps --help``. By default, the temperature is set to
:math:`T=0`, and the sphere and plane are assumed to be perfect reflectors.

Please note that due to parallelization, the number of terms computed in the
summations over :math:`m` varies from run to run. As a consequence, the
numerical value obtained for the free energy also varies from run to run. The
abort criterion for the summation over :math:`m` can be changed by the option
``--cutoff`` described in more detail later.

Mandatory options
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

There are two mandatory options: the separation :math:`L` between sphere and
plane, and the radius :math:`R` of the sphere. The program expects the lengths
given in units of meters. As an example, the following command computes the
Casimir interaction at :math:`T=0` for perfect reflectors for a sphere of
radius :math:`R=50\mu\mathrm{m}` and a separation :math:`L=500\,\mathrm{nm}`:

.. code-block:: console

    $ mpirun -n 8 ./caps -R 50e-6 -L 500e-9

The command ``mpirun`` will set up the environment for MPI and the flag ``-n``
specifies how many processes the program should use. If you want to utilize the
full capacity of your machine and your processor has N cores, set ``-n`` to
N+1. The output of this command looks similar to:

.. code-block:: console

    $ mpirun -n 8 ./caps -R 50e-6 -L 500e-9
    # version: 0.4.3
    # compiler: gcc
    # compile time: Feb 25 2019 14:03:27
    # compiled on: Linux jonas.physik.uni-augsburg.de 4.9.0-8-amd64 x86_64
    # pid: 19299
    # start time: Tue Feb 26 09:53:35 2019
    #
    # LbyR = 0.01
    # RbyL = 100
    # L = 5e-07
    # R = 5e-05
    # T = 0
    # cutoff = 1e-09
    # epsrel = 1e-06
    # iepsrel = 1e-08
    # ldim = 701
    # cores = 8
    # quad = adaptive Gauss-Kronrod
    #
    # xi*(L+R)/c=50.5, logdetD=-9.60686704239278, t=16.8099
    # xi*(L+R)/c=11769.7910188424, logdetD=-5.19555884457593e-101, t=3.0027
    # xi*(L+R)/c=0.216677594013123, logdetD=-27.8461616612113, t=14.3809
    # xi*(L+R)/c=1934.09140996997, logdetD=-5.35151875501729e-16, t=5.90594
    # xi*(L+R)/c=1.31857780188353, logdetD=-27.4908297269515, t=15.1216
       ...
    # xi*(L+R)/c=1.9476256940541, logdetD=-27.201610975434, t=14.9387
    # xi*(L+R)/c=4.12332703671369, logdetD=-26.061368385508, t=14.979
    # xi*(L+R)/c=2.63068289632324, logdetD=-26.8583901887955, t=14.8546
    #
    # ier=0, integral=-26.6608254093275, neval=165, epsrel=4.22793e-07
    #
    # 13525 determinants computed
    # stop time: Tue Feb 26 10:36:20 2019
    #
    # L/R, L, R, T, ldim, E*(L+R)/(hbar*c)
    0.009999999999999998, 5e-07, 5e-05, 0, 701, -428.5634172312517

The output is in the format of a CSV file and additional comments start with a
pound (#). The program first outputs some information on the compilation, i.e.,
version of CaPS, time of compilation, name of compiler, machine where it was
compiled and so on. Then, information about the geometry (radius :math:`R`,
minimal separation :math:`L`, aspect ratio :math:`R/L`, and inverse aspect
ratio :math:`L/R`), numerical parameters (cutoff, epsrel, iepsrel, ldim, cores)
are printed. We will discuss the numerical parameters in more detail later. The
value of cores is the number of MPI processes that are used for the
computation. Then, the determinant of the scattering matrix for different
Matsubara frequencies are printed. The comment starting with ``ier`` gives the
result of the integration. If the integration was successful, the value is
``ier=0``, see also the description of `dqags
<http://www.netlib.org/quadpack/dqags.f>`_ of `QUADPACK
<http://www.netlib.org/quadpack/>`_.  The program ends by printing the result
of the computation. The free energy is outputed in units of :math:`(L+R)/\hbar
c`, i.e., for this example the free energy is

.. math::
  \mathcal{F}\approx \frac{-428.6 \hbar c}{50\mu\mathrm{m}+500\mu\mathrm{nm}} \approx -2.68\times10^{-19} \mathrm{J}.

The PFA result in this case is :math:`\mathcal{F}_\mathrm{PFA} = \hbar c \pi^3 R/(720 L^2) \approx -2.72\times10^{-19} \mathrm{J}`.

The desired relative accuracy of the integration over the Matsubara frequencies
can be set using ``--epsrel``. By default, ``EPSREL`` is :math:`10^{-6}`.  Note
that the integrand needs to be sufficiently smooth. In particular, for very low
values of ``EPSREL`` you might need to decrease the value of ``CUTOFF`` using
``--cutoff``. The value of ``CUTOFF`` determines when the summation over
:math:`m` is stopped. The abort criterion is:

.. math::
    \frac{\log\mathrm{det}\left(1-\mathcal{M}^m(\xi)\right)}{\log\mathrm{det}\left(1-\mathcal{M}^0(\xi)\right)} < \mathrm{CUTOFF}

The default value of ``CUTOFF`` is :math:`10^{-9}`. As a rule of thumb, in
order that the integrand is sufficiently smooth for the integration routine,
``CUTOFF`` should be at least two orders of magnitude smaller than ``EPSREL``.

By default, the integration routine uses an adaptive Gauss-Kronrod method
provided by `CQUADPACK <https://github.com/ESSS/cquadpack>`_. For perfect
reflectors it is sometimes faster to use an adaptive exponentially convergent
Fourier-Chebyshev quadrature scheme (FCQS), see `Boyd, "Exponentially convergent
Fourier-Chebshev quadrature schemes on bounded and infinite intervals", JOSC 2,
2 (1987) <https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01061480>`_. You can use FCQS using the
flag ``--fcqs``. Since the adaptive algorithm for FCQS is not well tested, this
option is considered experimental. Moreover, it is not recommended to use FCQS
for any other materials than perfect reflectors.

Temperature
^^^^^^^^^^^

You can set the temperature using ``-T``. The following program computes the
free energy just like in the last example but at room temperature
:math:`T=300\mathrm{K}`:

.. code-block:: console

    $ mpirun -n 8 ./caps -R 50e-6 -L 500e-9 -T 300
    # version: 0.4.3
    # compiler: gcc
    # compile time: Feb 25 2019 14:03:27
    # compiled on: Linux jonas.physik.uni-augsburg.de 4.9.0-8-amd64 x86_64
    # pid: 20396
    # start time: Tue Feb 26 11:25:28 2019
    #
    # LbyR = 0.01
    # RbyL = 100
    # L = 5e-07
    # R = 5e-05
    # T = 300
    # using Matsubara spectrum decomposition (MSD)
    # cutoff = 1e-09
    # epsrel = 1e-06
    # iepsrel = 1e-08
    # ldim = 701
    # cores = 8
    # model = perfect reflectors
    #
    # xi*(L+R)/c=0, logdetD=-27.8619907991614, t=0.193124
    # xi*(L+R)/c=41.5698805095683, logdetD=-11.5794516487266, t=16.6413
    # xi*(L+R)/c=83.1397610191367, logdetD=-4.91948448017641, t=17.6647
    # xi*(L+R)/c=124.709641528705, logdetD=-2.13175536619868, t=18.3457
    # xi*(L+R)/c=166.279522038273, logdetD=-0.930897479022303, t=19.1386
    # xi*(L+R)/c=207.849402547842, logdetD=-0.407803084237451, t=19.1952
    # xi*(L+R)/c=249.41928305741, logdetD=-0.178887508701769, t=19.4133
    # xi*(L+R)/c=290.989163566978, logdetD=-0.0785144339556277, t=19.431
    # xi*(L+R)/c=332.559044076547, logdetD=-0.0344676750184605, t=19.1501
    # xi*(L+R)/c=374.128924586115, logdetD=-0.015132238792835, t=19.1419
    # xi*(L+R)/c=415.698805095683, logdetD=-0.00664345573274249, t=19.0193
    # xi*(L+R)/c=457.268685605252, logdetD=-0.00291655594485503, t=18.7029
    # xi*(L+R)/c=498.83856611482, logdetD=-0.00128033535183925, t=18.4298
    # xi*(L+R)/c=540.408446624388, logdetD=-0.000562015614133802, t=17.8942
    # xi*(L+R)/c=581.978327133957, logdetD=-0.000246682939573313, t=17.5315
    # xi*(L+R)/c=623.548207643525, logdetD=-0.000108265748892663, t=17.0982
    # xi*(L+R)/c=665.118088153093, logdetD=-4.75115918214971e-05, t=16.4634
    # xi*(L+R)/c=706.687968662662, logdetD=-2.08477925150647e-05, t=15.5548
    #
    # 1686 determinants computed
    # stop time: Tue Feb 26 11:30:37 2019
    #
    # L/R, L, R, T, ldim, E*(L+R)/(hbar*c)
    0.009999999999999998, 5e-07, 5e-05, 300, 701, -452.7922092119535

For finite temperature the free energy is no longer given as an integral, but
as a sum over the Matsubara frequencies :math:`\xi_n`. The summation over
:math:`n` is stopped once

.. math::

    \frac{\log\mathrm{det}\left( 1-\mathcal{M}(\xi_n) \right)}{\log\mathrm{det}\left( 1-\mathcal{M}(0) \right)} < \mathrm{EPSREL} .

By default, ``EPSREL`` is :math:`10^{-6}`. You can change the value of
``EPSREL`` using the option ``--epsrel``.

By default, the free energy is computed summing over the Matsubara frequencies
:math:`\xi_n`, which is called Matsubara spectrum decomposition (MSD). Another
option is to compute the free energy using Pad√© spectrum decomposition (PSD).
PSD is an optimal sum-over-poles expansion scheme, more information can be
found in `Hu, Xu, Yan, "Pad√© spectrum decompositions of quantum distribution
functions and optimal hierarchical equations of motion construction for quantum
open systems", J. Chem. Phys. 133, 101106 (2010)
<https://doi.org/10.1063/1.3602466>`_. The PSD requires less terms to be
computed compared to the MSD. You can tell the program to use PSD with the flag
``--psd``. The order is determined automatically to achieve a relative error of
the order specified by ``--epsrel``. You can also manually set the order using
``--psd-order``. Since the automatic determination of the order is not well
tested, this option is considered experimental.

If you are only interested in the high-temperature limit, the flag ``--ht``
will only compute :math:`\log\mathrm{det}(1-\mathcal{M}(0))` and output the
Casimir energy in the limit :math:`T\to\infty` in units of :math:`k_\mathrm{B}
T`. For example, for a sphere of radius :math:`R=100\mu\mathrm{m}` and a
smallest separation :math:`L=100\mathrm{nm}` one finds:

.. code-block:: console

    $ mpirun -n 8 ./caps -R 100e-6 -L 100e-9 --ht
    # version: 0.4.3
    # compiler: gcc
    # compile time: Feb 26 2019 17:42:26
    # compiled on: Linux jonas.physik.uni-augsburg.de 4.9.0-8-amd64 x86_64
    # pid: 29426
    # start time: Tue Feb 26 17:42:50 2019
    #
    # LbyR = 0.001
    # RbyL = 1000
    # L = 1e-07
    # R = 0.0001
    # high-temperature limit
    # cutoff = 1e-09
    # epsrel = 1e-06
    # iepsrel = 1e-08
    # ldim = 7001
    # cores = 8
    #
    # L/R, L, R, ldim, E_Drude/(kB*T), E_PR/(kB*T)
    0.0009999999999999998, 1e-07, 0.0001, 7001, -149.6981411829862, -296.4343145093178

Numerically, it is considerably easier to compute the high-temperature limit of
the Casimir free energy. For this example, the aspect ratio is
:math:`R/L=1000`, but the computation time on a standard desktop computer using
8 cores is only about 13 seconds. For the Drude result the analytical formula
given in `Bimonte, Emig, PRL 109, 160403 (2012)
<https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.109.160403>`_ is used.


Material parameters
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Up to this point, we have assumed that the sphere and the plate are perfect
reflectors.  If you want to model the sphere and the plate using the plasma
model, you can set the plasma frequency using ``--omegap``. The plasma
frequency is expected in units of :math:`\mathrm{eV}/\hbar`. For example, for
:math:`R=50\mu\mathrm{m}`, :math:`L=500\mathrm{nm}`, :math:`T=300\mathrm{K}`,
and gold (plasma frequency :math:`\omega_\mathrm{P}=9\mathrm{eV}/\hbar`), the
Casimir free energy assuming the plasma model is:

.. code-block:: console

    $ mpirun -n 8 ./caps -R 50e-6 -L 500e-9 -T 300 --omegap 9
    # version: 0.4.3
    # compiler: gcc
    # compile time: Feb 25 2019 14:03:27
    # compiled on: Linux jonas.physik.uni-augsburg.de 4.9.0-8-amd64 x86_64
    # pid: 20511
    # start time: Tue Feb 26 11:31:38 2019
    #
    # LbyR = 0.01
    # RbyL = 100
    # L = 5e-07
    # R = 5e-05
    # T = 300
    # using Matsubara spectrum decomposition (MSD)
    # cutoff = 1e-09
    # epsrel = 1e-06
    # iepsrel = 1e-08
    # ldim = 701
    # cores = 8
    # omegap = 9
    # gamma = 0
    # model = plasma
    #
    # xi*(L+R)/c=0, logdetD=-26.6976344223495, t=1.0548
    # xi*(L+R)/c=41.5698805095683, logdetD=-10.4687593311701, t=29.2239
    # xi*(L+R)/c=83.1397610191367, logdetD=-4.17127445011799, t=30.5278
    # xi*(L+R)/c=124.709641528705, logdetD=-1.69110879470416, t=31.9545
    # xi*(L+R)/c=166.279522038273, logdetD=-0.68977177243457, t=32.2149
    # xi*(L+R)/c=207.849402547842, logdetD=-0.28194807348852, t=33.1459
    # xi*(L+R)/c=249.41928305741, logdetD=-0.115330010733512, t=33.0782
    # xi*(L+R)/c=290.989163566978, logdetD=-0.0471851591737746, t=33.3165
    # xi*(L+R)/c=332.559044076547, logdetD=-0.0193059198900916, t=36.3263
    # xi*(L+R)/c=374.128924586115, logdetD=-0.00789924565082466, t=36.4202
    # xi*(L+R)/c=415.698805095683, logdetD=-0.00323219686668301, t=33.851
    # xi*(L+R)/c=457.268685605252, logdetD=-0.00132263206346751, t=31.1036
    # xi*(L+R)/c=498.83856611482, logdetD=-0.000541279202385481, t=30.3951
    # xi*(L+R)/c=540.408446624388, logdetD=-0.000221541550914926, t=29.6892
    # xi*(L+R)/c=581.978327133957, logdetD=-9.06879127562377e-05, t=28.5112
    # xi*(L+R)/c=623.548207643525, logdetD=-3.71288341482914e-05, t=27.586
    # xi*(L+R)/c=665.118088153093, logdetD=-1.5203622898795e-05, t=26.199
    #
    # 1582 determinants computed
    # stop time: Tue Feb 26 11:40:03 2019
    #
    # L/R, L, R, T, ldim, E*(L+R)/(hbar*c)
    0.009999999999999998, 5e-07, 5e-05, 300, 701, -408.1688659974158

To describe the objects using the Drude model, you can additional specify the
relaxation frequency :math:`\gamma` (also in units of
:math:`\mathrm{eV}/\hbar`). For gold, :math:`\gamma=35\mathrm{meV}/\hbar`, so
the same example as above for Drude gives:

.. code-block:: console

    $ mpirun -n 8 ./caps -R 50e-6 -L 500e-9 -T 300 --omegap 9 --gamma 0.035
    # version: 0.4.3
    # compiler: gcc
    # compile time: Feb 25 2019 14:03:27
    # compiled on: Linux jonas.physik.uni-augsburg.de 4.9.0-8-amd64 x86_64
    # pid: 24336
    # start time: Tue Feb 26 12:08:33 2019
    #
    # LbyR = 0.01
    # RbyL = 100
    # L = 5e-07
    # R = 5e-05
    # T = 300
    # using Matsubara spectrum decomposition (MSD)
    # cutoff = 1e-09
    # epsrel = 1e-06
    # iepsrel = 1e-08
    # ldim = 701
    # cores = 8
    # omegap = 9
    # gamma = 0.035
    # model = drude
    #
    # xi*(L+R)/c=0, logdetD=-14.5697227167729, t=0.000477076
    # xi*(L+R)/c=41.5698805095683, logdetD=-10.3653815649851, t=29.2174
    # xi*(L+R)/c=83.1397610191367, logdetD=-4.13628095371182, t=30.4618
    # xi*(L+R)/c=124.709641528705, logdetD=-1.67763657179774, t=31.9241
    # xi*(L+R)/c=166.279522038273, logdetD=-0.684394806814442, t=32.5905
    # xi*(L+R)/c=207.849402547842, logdetD=-0.279773855516853, t=33.1029
    # xi*(L+R)/c=249.41928305741, logdetD=-0.114446241958121, t=33.6549
    # xi*(L+R)/c=290.989163566978, logdetD=-0.0468251449212843, t=33.7789
    # xi*(L+R)/c=332.559044076547, logdetD=-0.0191591315699105, t=32.8368
    # xi*(L+R)/c=374.128924586115, logdetD=-0.00783937539816867, t=34.304
    # xi*(L+R)/c=415.698805095683, logdetD=-0.00320777554704996, t=33.1737
    # xi*(L+R)/c=457.268685605252, logdetD=-0.00131267076024208, t=31.7234
    # xi*(L+R)/c=498.83856611482, logdetD=-0.000537216353887839, t=30.7169
    # xi*(L+R)/c=540.408446624388, logdetD=-0.000219884619851423, t=30.7112
    # xi*(L+R)/c=581.978327133957, logdetD=-9.00122403077102e-05, t=29.2664
    # xi*(L+R)/c=623.548207643525, logdetD=-3.685333004516e-05, t=27.5843
    # xi*(L+R)/c=665.118088153093, logdetD=-1.50912958983084e-05, t=26.3201
    # xi*(L+R)/c=706.687968662662, logdetD=-6.18096543194596e-06, t=24.9774
    #
    # 1603 determinants computed
    # stop time: Tue Feb 26 12:17:19 2019
    #
    # L/R, L, R, T, ldim, E*(L+R)/(hbar*c)
    0.009999999999999998, 5e-07, 5e-05, 300, 701, -325.8011897578629

The Casimir energy in the high-temperature limit for the Drude and the plasma
model differ by a factor of 2. This is the reason why in this example the
Casimir energy using the plasma model is larger than using the Drude model.

General materials can be described using ``--material`` which expects the path
to a material file. A material file has the following format:

.. code-block:: console

    # Drude parameters for low frequencies
    # omegap_low = 9.0eV
    # gamma_low  = 0.03eV
    #
    # Drude parameters for high frequencies
    # omegap_high = 54.475279eV
    # gamma_high  = 211.48855eV
    #
    # xi in rad/s            epsilon(i*xi)
    151900000000.0000        27202177.31278406
    167090000000.0000        24722324.84701070
    182280000000.0000        22655566.74077545
    ...
    1.4886200000000000E+018   1.002550948190463
    1.5038100000000000E+018   1.002504731170786
    1.5190000000000000E+018   1.002459773692494

Each line either starts with a pound (#) or contains a frequency :math:`\xi` in
units of :math:`\mathrm{rad/s}` and the corresponding value of the dielectric
function :math:`\epsilon(\mathrm{i}\xi)` separated by spaces. The frequencies
have to be in ascending order. The dielectric function for an arbitrary
frequency is then computed using linear interpolation. For frequencies smaller
than the smallest frequency provided in the file, the dielectric function is
computed using the Drude model

.. math::
  \epsilon(\mathrm{i}\xi) = 1+\frac{\omega_\mathrm{P}^2}{\xi(\xi+\gamma)}

with the plasma frequency given by ``omegap_low`` and the relaxation frequency
given by ``gamma_low``. If ``omegap_low`` and ``gamma_low`` are not given in
the file, the dielectric function is assumed to be 1. The behavior for
frequencies larger than the largest provided frequency is analogous using the
parameters given by ``omegap_high`` and ``gamma_high``. More details can be
found in the directory ``materials/``.

Here is an example that computes the Casimir energy for a sphere of
:math:`R=50\mu\mathrm{m}` at separation :math:`L=500\mathrm{nm}` at room
temperature :math:`T=300\mathrm{K}` for real gold:

.. code-block:: console

    $ mpirun -n 8 ./caps -R 50e-6 -L 500e-9 -T 300 --material ../materials/gold.csv
    # version: 0.4.3
    # compiler: gcc
    # compile time: Feb 25 2019 14:03:27
    # compiled on: Linux jonas.physik.uni-augsburg.de 4.9.0-8-amd64 x86_64
    # pid: 24642
    # start time: Tue Feb 26 12:18:36 2019
    #
    # LbyR = 0.01
    # RbyL = 100
    # L = 5e-07
    # R = 5e-05
    # T = 300
    # using Matsubara spectrum decomposition (MSD)
    # cutoff = 1e-09
    # epsrel = 1e-06
    # iepsrel = 1e-08
    # ldim = 701
    # cores = 8
    # filename = ../materials/gold.csv
    # model = optical data (xi=0: Drude)
    # plasma = -26.6976344217189 (logdetD(xi=0) for plasma model with omegap=9eV)
    #
    # xi*(L+R)/c=0, logdetD=-14.5697227167729, t=1.0434
    # xi*(L+R)/c=41.5698805095683, logdetD=-10.3908796547603, t=29.5941
    # xi*(L+R)/c=83.1397610191367, logdetD=-4.15625893810359, t=30.6949
    # xi*(L+R)/c=124.709641528705, logdetD=-1.6919107999977, t=32.3372
    # xi*(L+R)/c=166.279522038273, logdetD=-0.693653981851821, t=32.8614
    # xi*(L+R)/c=207.849402547842, logdetD=-0.285378030697434, t=33.7248
    # xi*(L+R)/c=249.41928305741, logdetD=-0.117672555842387, t=33.5534
    # xi*(L+R)/c=290.989163566978, logdetD=-0.0486088504532428, t=33.1554
    # xi*(L+R)/c=332.559044076547, logdetD=-0.0201151891681236, t=33.0375
    # xi*(L+R)/c=374.128924586115, logdetD=-0.00833817561811858, t=32.8751
    # xi*(L+R)/c=415.698805095683, logdetD=-0.00346241156603652, t=32.5475
    # xi*(L+R)/c=457.268685605252, logdetD=-0.00144011362577151, t=31.6877
    # xi*(L+R)/c=498.83856611482, logdetD=-0.000600031780813664, t=31.1144
    # xi*(L+R)/c=540.408446624388, logdetD=-0.000250400886432969, t=31.9239
    # xi*(L+R)/c=581.978327133957, logdetD=-0.000104657168106622, t=31.2511
    # xi*(L+R)/c=623.548207643525, logdetD=-4.3804324287031e-05, t=28.8938
    # xi*(L+R)/c=665.118088153093, logdetD=-1.83601183587417e-05, t=27.7136
    # xi*(L+R)/c=706.687968662662, logdetD=-7.70510781683187e-06, t=26.0717
    #
    # 1681 determinants computed
    # stop time: Tue Feb 26 12:27:30 2019
    #
    # L/R, L, R, T, ldim, E*(L+R)/(hbar*c)
    0.009999999999999998, 5e-07, 5e-05, 300, 701, -326.8806691538941

The energy printed in the last line assumes a Drude model for the zero-th
Matsubara frequency. If you want to use the plasma model for the zero-th
Matsubara frequency, you can use the value given by ``# plasma =``. This
number, i.e., -26.69763... is given in units of :math:`k_\mathrm{B}T/2` and
corresponds to the additional contribution in the high-temperature limit to the
energy in the plasma model. In this example, the free energy using the Drude
model for zero-frequency is

.. math::
  \mathcal{F}_\mathrm{Drude} \approx -326.88 \frac{\hbar c}{L+R} \approx -2.0464\times10^{-19}\mathrm{J},

and assuming the plasma model for zero frequency

.. math::
  \mathcal{F}_\mathrm{plasma} \approx \mathcal{F}_\mathrm{Drude} + \frac{-26.69763 k_\mathrm{B}T}{2} \approx -2.5993 \times 10^{-19} \mathrm{J} .

Truncation of the vector space
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The truncation of the vector space is described in more detail in `Hartmann,
"Casimir effect in the plane-sphere geometry: Beyond the proximity force
approximation", PhD thesis (Universit√§t Augsburg, 2018)
<https://opus.bibliothek.uni-augsburg.de/opus4/44798>`_. You can either
specify the dimension of the vector space using ``--ldim``, or you choose the
vector space using the parameter ``--eta``:

.. math::
    \ell_\mathrm{dim} = \mathrm{max}\left(20, \left\lceil \eta R/L \right\rceil\right) .

The estimated error due to the truncation of the vector space depending on :math:`\eta`
is given by:

+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| numerical error | :math:`10^{-2}` | :math:`10^{-3}` | :math:`10^{-4}` | :math:`10^{-5}` | :math:`10^{-6}` | :math:`10^{-7}` | :math:`10^{-8}` |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| :math:`\eta`    | 2.8             | 4               | 5.2             | 6.4             | 7.6             | 8.8             | 10              |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+


Other options
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The computation of the matrix elements of the round-trip operator contains an
integration. The desired relative error for this integration can be set using
``--iepsrel``. The default value of :math:`10^{-8}` should be sufficient for
almost all purposes. If you want to compute the Casimir energy to very high
accuracy, to :math:`10^{-7}` or better, you might want to use a smaller value
for ``IEPSREL``.


caps_logdetD
------------

The program ``caps_logdetD`` computes

.. math::
    \log\mathrm{det}\left(1-\mathcal{M}^m(\xi)\right) .

depending on :math:`m`, :math:`\xi`, :math:`R`, and :math:`L` The options
``-L``, ``-R``, ``--ldim``, ``--material``, and ``--iepsrel`` are the same as
for the program ``caps``.

Besides ``-L`` and ``-R``, further mandatory options are ``-m`` and ``--xi``.
The frequency given by ``--xi`` is expected in units of :math:`(L+R)/c`. In
addition, you can specify the algorithm used to compute the determinant with
``--detalg``. Valid options are HODLR, QR, LU, and Cholesky.

A typical output looks like

.. code-block:: console

    $ ./caps_logdetD -R 100e-6 -L 1e-6 -m 1 --xi 1
    # ./caps_logdetD, -R, 100e-6, -L, 1e-6, -m, 1, --xi, 1
    # L/R    = 0.009999999999999998
    # L      = 1e-06
    # R      = 0.0001
    # ldim   = 501
    # epsrel = 1.0e-08
    # detalg = HODLR
    #
    # L, R, Œæ*(L+R)/c, m, logdet(Id-M), ldim, time
    1e-06, 0.0001, 1, 1, -6.463973151333013, 501, 0.548678

Sometimes, it is useful to output the round-trip matrix in numpy format. If the
environment variable ``CAPS_DUMP`` is set and ``detalg`` is not HODLR, the
round-trip matrix will be saved to the filename contained in ``CAPS_DUMP``.
Also note that if ``detalg`` is Cholesky, only the upper half of the matrix is
computed.

Here is an example to generate and save a round-trip matrix:

.. code-block:: console

    $ CAPS_DUMP=M.npy ./caps_logdetD -R 100e-6 -L 1e-6 -m 1 --xi 2 --detalg LU
    # ./caps_logdetD, -R, 100e-6, -L, 1e-6, -m, 1, --xi, 2, --detalg, LU
    # L/R    = 0.009999999999999998
    # L      = 1e-06
    # R      = 0.0001
    # ldim   = 501
    # epsrel = 1.0e-08
    # detalg = LU
    #
    # L, R, Œæ*(L+R)/c, m, logdet(Id-M), ldim, time
    1e-06, 0.0001, 2, 1, -6.349155228127988, 501, 0.817265

    $ ls -lh M.npy 
    -rw------- 1 hartmmic g-103665 7,7M Feb 26 13:26 M.npy

    $ python
    Python 3.6.5 | packaged by conda-forge | (default, Apr  6 2018, 13:39:56) 
    [GCC 4.8.2 20140120 (Red Hat 4.8.2-15)] on linux
    Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
    >>> import numpy as np
    >>> M = np.load("M.npy")    # load matrix
    >>> dim,_ = M.shape         # get dimension
    >>> Id = np.eye(dim)        # identity matrix
    >>> np.linalg.slogdet(Id-M) # compute log of determinant
    (1.0, -6.349155228128008)


capc
----

The program  ``capc`` computes the Casimir interaction in the cylinder-plane
geometry. The radius of the cylinder is given by ``-R`` and the smallest
separation between cylinder and plate is given by ``-d``. Both lengths are
expected in meters. At the moment, only perfect reflectors at zero temperature
are supported.

This example computes the Casimir free energy for a cylinder of radius
:math:`R=100\mu\mathrm{m}` and a separation of :math:`d=100\mathrm{nm}`:

.. code-block:: console

    $ ./capc -R 100e-6 -d 100e-9
    # R/d = 1000
    # d = 1e-07
    # R = 0.0001
    # T = 0
    # lmax = 6000
    # epsrel = 1e-08
    #
    # d/R, d, R, T, lmax, E_PFA/(L*hbar*c), E_D/E_PFA, E_N/E_PFA, E_EM/E_PFA
    0.001, 1e-07, 0.0001, 0, 6000, -72220981652413.5, 0.500089151078031, 0.499432943796718, 0.999522094874749

Here, :math:`L` denotes the length of the cylinder. The matrix elements of the
round-trip operator are correct assuming that :math:`L\gg R,d`. ``E_D`` and
``E_N`` correspond to Dirichlet and Neumann boundary conditions, ``E_EM`` is
the energy for the electromagnetic field, ``E_EM = E_D + E_N``.


cass
----

This program computes the Casimir free energy at :math:`T=0` in the
sphere-sphere geometry for perfect reflectors. It is assumed that both spheres
have the same radius :math:`R=R_1=R_2`.

The round-trip operator in the sphere-sphere geometry is given as

.. math::

     \mathcal{M}_\mathrm{SS} = \mathcal{R}_1 \mathcal{T}_{12} \mathcal{R}_2 \mathcal{T}_{21} \,.

Here, :math:`\mathcal{R}_j` denotes the reflection operator at sphere
:math:`j`, and :math:`\mathcal{T}_{ij}` is the translation operator from object
:math:`j` to object :math:`i`. After symmetrization and for equal radii, the
round-trip operator is:

.. math::

     \widehat{\mathcal{M}}_\mathrm{SS} = \underbrace{\sqrt{\mathcal{R}} \mathcal{T} \sqrt{\mathcal{R}}}_{=A} \underbrace{\sqrt{\mathcal{R}} \mathcal{T} \sqrt{\mathcal{R}}}_{=A} = A^2

Since for perfect reflectors the Fresnel coefficients are
:math:`r_\mathrm{TM}=-r_\mathrm{TE}=1`, the operator :math:`A` can be expressed
as :math:`A=\mathcal{M}_\mathrm{PS}` where :math:`\mathcal{M}_\mathrm{PS}` is
the round-trip operator in the plane-sphere geometry. This idea is basically
the method of image charges.

You can compute the free energy using the program ``cass``. The smallest
separation between the two spheres is denoted as :math:`d` and the radius of
the spheres is :math:`R`. Here is an example to compute the Casimir energy for
:math:`R_1=R_2=100\mu\mathrm{m}` and :math:`d=10\mu\mathrm{m}`:

.. code-block:: console

	$ ./cass -R 100e-6 -d 10e-6
	# version: 0.4.3-dev
	# compiler: gcc
	# compile time: Mar 13 2019 22:10:53
	# compiled on: Linux jonas.physik.uni-augsburg.de 4.9.0-8-amd64 x86_64
	#
	# sphere-sphere geometry
	# model: perfect reflectors
	# R1 = R2 = 0.0001
	# d = 1e-05
	# T = 0
	# ldim = 50
	# epsrel = 1e-06
	# iepsrel = 1e-09
	# cutoff = 1e-10
	#
	# xi*d/c=1, logdet=-0.303363189004
	# xi*d/c=233.06516869, logdet=-3.13138917509e-204
	# xi*d/c=0.004290645426, logdet=-1.68510617725
		...
	# xi*d/c=0.0385668454268, logdet=-1.65999004318
	# xi*d/c=0.081650040331, logdet=-1.60322260646
	# xi*d/c=0.0520927306203, logdet=-1.64443634206
	#
	# ier = 0, neval = 135
	#
	# R1, R2, L, E*d/(hbar*c), relative error (due to integration)
	0.0001, 0.0001, 1e-05, -0.166155548334, 5.80089e-07

The runtime of this program is about 4 minutes. For a full list of options see
``cass --help``.

The program uses a full matrix-matrix multiplication using LAPACK to compute
:math:`\widehat{\mathcal{M}}_\mathrm{SS}` and an LU decomposition to compute
the determinant of the scattering matrix. Also, the program does not support
parallelization. For this reason, the program is limited to not too large
values of :math:`R/d`.



API Documentation
=================

The documentation of the API is available at ``manual/api.pdf`` or can be
generated running

.. code-block:: console

  $ doxygen doxygen.conf

in the directory ``src/``. The documentation will be generated in ``docs/api/``.
You need doxygen installed on your computer.


Examples
========

In the directory ``examples/`` you can find examples of simple programs that
demonstrate how to use the CaPS API. The examples are kept simple and well
documented.
